chore(config): Multiple pipelines RFC (#8378)
timberio/vector: rfcs/2021-07-19-8216-multiple-pipelines.md

- Component reuse - The ability to define boilerplate for reuse across many different pipelines. This will likely align with Datadog’s “pipeline catalogue”.
- Pipeline quotas - The ability to limit how much data a pipeline can send to a sink.

## Motivation

- Helps Vector to grow organically within an organization by allowing teams to adopt Vector at their own pace without heavy administrator involvement.
- Reduces the management overhead of devops/SREs by enabling teams to manage their own pipelines (spread the management load).

## Internal Proposal

### How and where the pipelines are stored

To keep the actual structure and avoid retro compatibility issues, vector should read from the default folder `/etc/vector/pipelines/*` the difference pipeline's configuration files.
This folder should be configurable through the cli, the same way than for the configuration file, with `--pipelines-dir` or though and environment variable `VECTOR_PIPELINES_DIR`.
The pipeline directory should have a flat structure (no sub directories) and only `json`, `toml` and `yaml` files will be supported.

### How vector reads the pipelines and what are the limits

> Vector will read each of the pipeline configuration files at start time and create an `id` and a `name` attribute corresponding to the pipeline's filename. A `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as `id` and `name`. In the pipeline's configuration file, the `id` can be set manually.

Author: Considering the discussion you had on slack and [this PR](https://github.com/timberio/vector/issues/8408), I guess I can close this and just keep using only `id`.

> Vector will read each of the pipeline configuration files at start time and create an `id` and a `name` attribute corresponding to the pipeline's filename. A `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as `id` and `name`. In the pipeline's configuration file, the `id` can be set manually.

Reviewer: Agreed, I think settling on `id` is the right move.

To avoid backward incompatibility, pipelines will be loaded from a `pipelines` sub-directory relative to the Vector configuration directory (e.g., `/etc/vector/pipelines`). Therefore, if a user changes the location of the Vector configuration directory they will also change the `pipelines` directory path. They are coupled.
The `pipelines` directory will contain all pipelines represented as individual files. For simplicity, and to ensure users do not over complicate pipeline management, sub-directories/nesting are not allowed. This is inspired by Terraform's single-level directory nesting, which has been a net positive for simple management of large Terraform projects.
Each pipeline file is a processing subset of a larger Vector configuration file. Therefore, it follows the same syntax as Vector's configuration (`toml`, `yaml`, and `json`).

### Configuration

Each time Vector will read its configuration file (on boot and when it live reloads), it will read the referring pipeline configuration files and associate an `id` attribute corresponding to the pipeline's filename.

A pipeline can be referenced in a configuration file as follows

```toml
# vector.toml

> [resources.pipeline_id]

Reviewer 2: In general, I disagree with requiring pipelines to be defined in the "root" `vector.toml` file due to workflow reasons. The root `vector.toml` file will be maintained by an admin (not teams), and there will be circumstances where teams should be able to onboard themselves without admin intervention. Therefore, adding a file in the `pipelines` direction should be enough to onboard a pipeline.

This is not to say we shouldn't allow configuration options for pipelines in the root `vector.toml` file, but they should be optional, and these options should be for admins (restricting what pipelines).

cc @jszwedko since this was his idea.

Author: so maybe, to keep @lukesteensen 's logic of keeping things simple, we should keep this restriction part for another RFC?

Author: Ok, you answered this after ;)

> type = "pipeline"

Reviewer 2: Yes, @jdrouet how did you land on using resources for this? Just curious if there were discussions on this.

filename = "pipeline_id.toml"
[resources.pipeline_id.forwards]
source_alias = ["nginx", "apache", "transform_name"]
sink_alias = ["elastic", "blackhole"]
```

The filename is used to point out the pipeline configuration file in the `pipelines` folder.
In the pipeline's configuration file, the `id` can be set manually.
A `load-balancer.yml` will, by default, have `load-balancer` as `id`.
If the `id` matches the name of the file, the `filename` field can be omitted in the pipeline's declaration.

In addition, a `version` attribute will be set containing the hash of the pipeline's configuration file to keep track of the file changes.
If several files having the same `id` in that folder (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`), vector should error.

The pipeline's configuration files should only contain transforms or vector will error.
A pipeline cannot use another pipeline or vector will error.

A pipeline has access to the components configured in the `forwards` section.
The forwards section in the pipeline declaration allows to create an alias for the resources that will be accessible to avoid name conflicts when using multiple vector configuration files.

> The following wouldn't be possible, because the `generate` name would conflict.

Author: I tried to use 2 different configuration files with the same name for 2 sources and it would conflict.
My point is, if we want to have a pipeline that could be used 2 times, with 2 different sources, without hardcoding the source name in the pipeline, having a system of alias like specified [here](https://github.com/timberio/vector/pull/8378/files/37bf8f1b7e8bd5151bd423e445a50ca3e0dbccd1#diff-0137e1c5d6fe31e65db43a4d58fc16446097d68b6218c2363786706fb15db2b7R65) would solve it.

Each pipeline file is a processing subset of a larger Vector configuration file. Therefore, it follows the same syntax as Vector's configuration (`toml`, `yaml`, and `json`). Each pipeline will have an `id` derived the name of the file without the extension. For example, the pipeline defined in `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as its `id`.

Pipelines have access to any components defined in the root configuration directory. For example, if the transform `foo` is defined in `/etc/vector/bar.toml`, it will be accessible by the pipeline `/etc/vector/pipelines/pipeline.toml`, but if a transform `bar` is defined in `/etc/vector/pipelines/another-pipeline.toml`, it will _not_ be accessible by other pipelines.

If no pipeline is defined, Vector behaves as if the feature didn't exist. This way, a configuration from a version without the `pipeline` feature will keep working. If a pipeline file is left empty, Vector behaves as if it doesn't exist.

> If any of the following constraints are violated, Vector will error on boot:

Reviewer 2: This appears to be the final issue before we can approve this RFC. After talking with a few design partners, a single invalid pipeline should not prevent Vector from starting or reloading. Stopping the world due to one bad pipeline would be very bad for some users. Alternatively, missing data while a pipeline is invalid is also bad (ex: a `kafka` iterator advancing because other pipelines are valid). My preference is to default to allowing Vector to start and logging an error, but provide users an option to change this.

Curious what you think @lukesteensen.

Reviewer: If it is the same design partner conversation I'm thinking of, they also wanted Vector to fallback to the previous, working, definition of the failing pipeline. They also seemed to be satisfied with being able to run `vector validate` before merges that would change the config to avoid errors.

I'm inclined to punt on that for now and just keep Vector's current behavior of all-or-nothing for this initial iteration while we learn more.

Reviewer 2: Works for me. Let's punt. @jdrouet can you add this to the "Future work" section?

Reviewer 3: I'd be hesitant to let Vector start up and run while ignoring a portion of the config. In many cases I don't think people will be watching the log output to see that error, so it could effectively be pretty silent.

It's a little further off, but I'd rather catch invalid pipelines in a validation phase before application of a new config, and that workflow could be built into a future fleet management / remote config service. It's just simpler in a lot of ways (e.g. reloading) if we can always assume we're running a full, valid config.

Author: I added this to the `Future Improvements` section. I guess I can close this.

# ...
```

The `outputs` option is made to forward the events from inside the pipeline to an external component.

#### From configuration to topology

If we look deeper at the configuration building process, the configuration compiler will require the pipelines to build the [configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/builder.rs#L71).

To do so, we'll need to implement a `Pipeline` from the previous section. We'll then update [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4) to build a `Config` containing the required pipelines components. The compiler will load the pipelines' transforms and add the `outputs` to the corresponding `sinks`.

The components coming from the pipeline will be cloned inside the final `Config`, in the `IndexMap` containing the `transforms` and the `outputs` from the pipeline components will be added to the referring components input field.

For example, the following configuration and pipeline, and its **equivalent** once built.

```toml
# /etc/vector/vector.toml
[sources.in]
# ...

[sinks.out]
# ...

# /etc/vector/pipelines/foo.toml
[transforms.bar]
inputs = ["in"]

> outputs = ["out"]

Reviewer: I imagine a components inputs will now be the union of `inputs` and as well as any components where it is listed in `outputs`? Just calling out if we want to still allow sinks to use inputs in addition to being listed as outputs.

Author: We don't want to break backward compatibility, so I guess we should keep both.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I don't think we want to change how things work outside of pipelines. So `outputs` should be a pipelines-exclusive addition and everything else can stay the same.

# ...

# equivalent once compiled
[sources.in]
# ...

> [transforms.foo#baz]

Reviewer 2: Should this `bar` instead of `baz`?

Reviewer: The `#` is mentioned below:

> In order to avoid internal conflicts with the pipeline components `id`s, the components `id`s will be internally prefixed with the pipeline `id` (`pipeline_id#component_id`) but the user can still reference the components with their `id` inside the pipeline configuration.

I am wondering about this too though.

Reviewer: Are we envisioning that the pipeline components would be re-ID'd to `foo#baz` (component `baz` in pipeline `foo`)? These IDs are used in the tracing spans, log messages, etc..

We'll also likely want to document that users shouldn't use the `#` in their component names.

At least for metrics, I think we should avoid the prefix given that `pipeline_id` is a separate tag.

Author: My initial intention was to internally prefix it with the `pipeline_id` only during the building of the `Topology`. Before being built, the pipeline's transforms still have there own id, once the topology, they still have there own id. This was just an attempt to treat global transforms and pipeline's transforms the same way. But I realize this can be done without event doing that.
We'd have to update the [`Pieces` structure](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/src/topology/builder.rs#L25) in order to have a new attribute `pipelines: HashMap<String, HashMap<String, Task>>`.
Also, the [`ConfigDiff` structure](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/src/config/diff.rs#L5) will have to become a bit more complicated and do the inner of each pipeline.
In the end, it's doable without this trick, although it might take a bit more time to refactor/mutualize the existing code to work with Pipelines.
I'll update the RFC accordingly 😉

Reviewer 3: One alternative could be to introduce something like `struct TaskId { pipeline: Option<String>, id: String }` and use that as the key for the maps in `Pieces` instead of just a raw string.

Reviewer: I am starting to think maybe we do want to model it explicitly in the `TaskId`. This'll require some refactoring, as you note, but should make interacting with component ids more explicit. This could then also be used to easily expose this information in the GraphQL API without needing to do string splitting.

I say we give that a shot first at least.

Author: @leebenson had some arguments about that I think.

Reviewer 4: My main thought here was that we need some mechanism to determine that a component is _internal_ , vs. one that has been explicitly configured by a user in top-level config.

Along with pipelines, this would also be useful for the Datadog observability feature I'm working on now, where an API key effectively creates an 'internal' pipeline outside of top-level config.

This flag would be useful for avoiding name clashes and having the GraphQL API make clear the distinction between what is configured by the user and created via some internal magic.

Author: After discussing with @leebenson, we ended up with the following proposal.
In the `ConfigBuilder` and `Topology` builder, instead of having `HashMap<String, Component>`, we should update with a `Hash<ComponentName, Component>` with:

```rust
enum ComponentName {
  Public { name: String },
  Scoped { scope: String, name: String },
  Internal { name: String },
}
```

# RFC 8216 - 2021-07-19 - Multiple Pipelines

Large Vector users often require complex Vector topologies to facilitate the collection and processing of data from many different upstream sources. This results in large Vector configuration files that are hard to manage across different teams. This makes Vector a bad candidate for large teams that require autonomy to facilitate sane collaboration.

## Context

- [RFC 2064](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/rfcs/2020-03-17-2064-event-driven-observability.md) Event drive observability.

> - [RFC 8288 (PR)](https://github.com/timberio/vector/pull/8400) Adding the `resources` component.

Reviewer 2: Can we remove this since it is not relevant to this PR?

## Scope

### In the scope

- How and where the pipelines are defined
- How vector reads the pipelines and what are the limitations of pipelines
- How do we monitor pipelines components

### Out of scope

- How the pipelines should be synchronized between vector instances
- Pre/post processing of data - The ability to prepare and normalize data.
- Connecting pipelines together - The ability to take input from another pipeline.
- Component reuse - The ability to define boilerplate for reuse across many different pipelines. This will likely align with Datadog’s “pipeline catalogue”.

> - Pipeline quotas - The ability to limit how much data a pipeline can send to a sink.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Administrator pipeline controls - Quotas, limiting sinks/sources, access control
```

> - Visibility of the components - The ability to give access to any components within the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Access control - The ability to control access of global resources (sources and sinks) within pipelines.
```

> ## Pain

Reviewer 2: There's more pain that just delegation and collaboration:

- It is not possible to observe individual pipelines (paths on the graph).
- It is not possible to restrict what pipelines can do (which data they can access, how much data they can send, etc).
- Managing a large graph is cumbersome and usually results in a very large Vector configuration file that is hard to navigate. Splitting the vector config into multiple files is a creative exercise for the user without any guidance.

> - If an admin wants to split responsibilities between `ops` and `devs` by only allowing the `ops` to deal with `sources/sinks` and the `devs`, it's currently not possible.

Reviewer 2: This isn't super clear. The idea is to delegate management of pipelines across a matrix of teams and services.

## User Experience

These changes are providing a way for vector users to split their configuration in a way that improves the collaboration between ops and devs.

> This split will take be made by creating a pipeline configuration file, in which the devs will be able to configure their components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This split will be made by allowing the creation of individual pipeline configuration files, intended to align with services and teams, enabling autonomous management.
```

The ops will now configure their `sources` and `sinks`, and expose them to be used by the devs.
The ops will be able to only given access to some of the common components when configuring the pipeline.
The devs will have the ability to consume the provided components without being able to change the common configuration.

> The users will be able to monitor their pipelines through the `internal_metrics` source.

Reviewer 2: Should this be a list?

## Motivation

- Helps Vector to grow organically within an organization by allowing teams to adopt Vector at their own pace without heavy administrator involvement.
- Reduces the management overhead of devops/SREs by enabling teams to manage their own pipelines (spread the management load).

## Implementation

### How and where the pipelines are stored

> To avoid backward incompatibility, pipelines will be loaded from a `pipelines` sub-directory relative to the Vector configuration directory (e.g., `/etc/vector/pipelines`). Therefore, if a user changes the location of the Vector configuration directory they will also change the `pipelines` directory path. They are coupled.

Reviewer 2: This was my idea, but I've since backtracked on it after exploring a pattern of coupling pipeline configs with applications. Imagine checking in your service-specific pipeline config with your application repository and then delivering that config alongside your app. In this scenario pipeline configs could live in multiple places.

To be clear, the `pipelines` subdirectory makes sense as a default, but we should allow configuration to enable the above pattern.

Author: or even have multiple sources if I follow your logic? Have a folder dedicated per team for example...?

Reviewer 2: After discussing with @jdrouet, we will follow up with this improvement.

Author: maybe we should do that in a future RFC, to keep this simple for now?

Reviewer 4: I'd like to see this noted in "out of scope", as I could see a more flexible `pipelines` dir being a common request we'll want to circle back to.

Reviewer 2: Yes, as such, I would like to refrain from exposing any sort of pipelines direction configuration option since we'll likely want to support multiple directories in the future.

@jdrouet can you note this in the "out of scope" section, ensure this RFC does not propose a pipelines directory configuration option, and then close this comment?

The `pipelines` directory will contain all pipelines represented as individual files. For simplicity, and to ensure users do not over complicate pipeline management, sub-directories/nesting are not allowed. This is inspired by Terraform's single-level directory nesting, which has been a net positive for simple management of large Terraform projects.
Each pipeline file is a processing subset of a larger Vector configuration file. Therefore, it follows the same syntax as Vector's configuration (`toml`, `yaml`, and `json`).

### Configuration

Each time Vector will read its configuration file (on boot and when it live reloads), it will first read the pipeline configuration files and associate an `id` attribute corresponding to the pipeline's filename.

> A pipeline can be referenced in a configuration file as follows

Reviewer 2: To summarize the comments below. For this first version, I would remove any sort of pipeline declaration in the root file. We can cover that when we follow up with access control and restrictions.

```toml
# vector.toml
[resources.pipeline_id]
type = "pipeline"
filename = "pipeline_id.toml"
[resources.pipeline_id.forwards]
source_alias = ["nginx", "apache", "transform_name"]
sink_alias = ["elastic", "blackhole"]
```

The filename is used to point out the pipeline configuration file in the `pipelines` folder.
In the pipeline's configuration file, the `id` can be set manually.
A `load-balancer.yml` will, by default, have `load-balancer` as `id`.
If the `id` matches the name of the file, the `filename` field can be omitted in the pipeline's declaration.

> If several files having the same `id` in that folder (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`), vector should error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If several files having the same `id` in that folder (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`), vector will error on boot.
```

The pipeline's configuration files should only contain transforms or vector will error.
A pipeline cannot use another pipeline or vector will error.

A pipeline has access to the components configured in the `forwards` section.

> The forwards section in the pipeline declaration allows to create an alias for the resources that will be accessible to avoid name conflicts when using multiple vector configuration files.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this for now. For the first version the pipeline has access to everything.

Now, if we look deeper at the configuration building process, the configuration compiler will require the pipelines in order to build the [configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/builder.rs#L71).

To do so, we'll need to implement a `PipelineConfigBuilder` with the following structures

```rust
struct PipelineTransformOuter {
    #[serde(flatten)]
    content: TransformOuter,
    outputs: Set<String>,
}
struct PipelineConfigBuilder {
    pub id: String,
    pub transforms: Map<String, PipelineTransformOuter>,
}
```

then we'll update [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4), in order to build a `Config` containing the required pipeline components, the compiler will load the pipeline's configurations, load the transforms and substitute the aliases.

The components coming from the pipeline would be cloned inside the final `Config`, in the `transforms` `IndexMap` and the `outputs` from the pipeline components will be added to the referring `Sink` input field.

### Observing pipelines

Users should be able to observe and monitor individual pipelines.

> This means relevant metrics coming from the `internal_metrics` source must contain a `pipeline_id` tag referring to the pipeline `id`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means relevant metrics coming from the `internal_metrics` source must contain a `pipeline_id` tag referring to the pipeline's `id`.
```

In Vector, the `Task` structure is what emits the events for `internal_metrics`.

> After [build the different pieces of the topology](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/topology/builder.rs#L106), we've to update the [`Task::new`](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/topology/builder.rs#L163) in order to accept an `Option<PipelineId>` so that when it emits the metrics events it can provide the information about the pipeline.

Reviewer 2: This is hard to understand. The grammar is off. I tried fixing it myself but wasn't sure what you meant.

- How does this position us for success in the future?

## Prior Art

_TODO_

## Drawbacks

- Why should we not do this?
- What kind on ongoing burden does this place on the team?

## Alternatives

- Do nothing: we can already use several configuration files, people could split their existing configuration.

This would imply some duplication if a transform is used in multiple configuration files.
Anybody could add a sink or source even if they don't have permission.

- Do nothing: write a tool that would write a big configuration file where each pipeline would start with a dummy filter that we could monitor in the `internal_metrics`.

- Evolve vector to use a tag/filter model like our competitors, have a 'pipeline' be a 'tag'.

Not able to add internal metrics to specific transforms and monitor them.
Doesn't block to create other sources/sinks.

- Run a single vector per-'pipeline' and support metric tagging to distinguish at the telemetry level.

Adds lot of complexity and would add some constraints regarding resources that can only been used once.
Doesn't block to create other sources/sinks.

> ## Outstanding Questions

Reviewer 2: @lukesteensen didn't you have other questions to add?

- What is the default pipeline?
- What about pipelines that don't have transforms (sources connecting directly to sinks)

Anything else?

- Should the `pipelines` directory location be configurable through the cli?

```bash
vector --pipeline-dir /foo/bar/pipelines
```

> - Should `pipelines` enable reuse? Should we be able to use it several times across a configuration?

Reviewer 2: Not right now. This requires much more UX discussion.

> - Should the `ops` have to do anything for a pipeline to load? Should we reference a pipeline in the configuration?

Reviewer 2: No. This is important for autonomous management. Some admin will not want to be involved, at all, with adding a new pipeline.

> - Should the `devs` write a sort of function or a snippet (as a pipeline) that the `ops` would use?

Reviewer 2: What do you mean here?

Each of the defined transforms will be callable by using `pipeline-id.transform-id` outside of the pipeline's configuration file to avoid conflicts.
A pipeline cannot use a component defined in another pipeline of vector will error.

The structure of the pipeline's configuration file should be as follow

```toml
id = "load-balancer"

[transforms.first]
...

[transforms.second]
...
```

Now, if we look deeper at the configuration building process, the configuration compiler will require the pipelines in order to build the [configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/builder.rs#L71).
To do so, we'll need to implement a `PipelineBuilder` that would work the same way as the the `ConfigBuilder` and use it in [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4) in order to load the pipeline's components inside the configuration. When building the `Config`, the [transforms](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L34) from the pipelines will have to be injected only when they are being used.

### What metadata vector adds to the events going through a pipeline

> Each time an event goes through a pipeline, vector will create a field (a tag for metrics) `pipelines.${PIPELINE_ID} = ${PIPELINE_VERSION}` in order to be able to track the path taken by an event.

Reviewer: Is adding this field to events a requirement? I'm not seeing why it is necessary unless I'm missing something.

With regards to internal metrics, we should be able to add the pipeline id to the tracing span around the transforms in the pipeline to ensure that metrics are tagged with a `pipeline_id`. This would also add the field to internal logs.

# RFC 8216 - 2021-07-19 - multiple pipelines

Large Vector users often require complex Vector topologies to facilitate the collection and processing of data from many different upstream sources. This results in large Vector configuration files that are hard to manage across different teams. This makes Vector a bad candidate for large teams that require autonomy to facilitate sane collaboration.

## Scope

This RFC will cover:

- How and where the pipelines are stored
- How vector reads the pipelines and what are the limits of pipelines

> - What metadatas vector adds to the events going through a pipeline

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- What metadata vector adds to the events going through a pipeline
```

This RFC will not cover:

- How the pipelines should be synchronized between vector instances
- Pre/post processing of data - The ability to prepare and normalize data.
- Connecting pipelines together - The ability to take input from another pipeline.
- Component reuse - The ability to define boilerplate for reuse across many different pipelines. This will likely align with Datadog’s “pipeline catalogue”.
- Pipeline quotas - The ability to limit how much data a pipeline can send to a sink.

## Motivation

- Helps Vector to grow organically within an organization by allowing teams to adopt Vector at their own pace without heavy administrator involvement.
- Reduces the management overhead of devops/SREs by enabling teams to manage their own pipelines (spread the management load).

## Internal Proposal

### How and where the pipelines are stored

> To keep the actual structure and avoid retro compatibility issues, vector should read from the default folder `/etc/vector/pipelines/*` the difference pipeline's configuration files.

Reviewer 6: I'm not totally sure what this sentence is saying. Are you stating that `/etc/vector/pipelines` will be the configuration directory for each pipeline? So, pipeline 'foo' would be configured by `/etc/vector/pipelines/foo.toml` and 'bar' `/etc/vector/pipelines/bar`?

Author: Yes, the pipeline foo would be configured by `/etc/vector/pipelines/foo.toml` and bar by `/etc/vector/pipelines/bar.toml` (or `json`, or `yml`). I'll clarify this.

The pipeline directory should have a flat structure (no sub directories) and only `json`, `toml` and `yaml` files will be supported.

To discuss: make this folder should be configurable through the cli, the same way than for the configuration file, with `--pipelines-dir` or though and environment variable `VECTOR_PIPELINES_DIR`.

### How vector reads the pipelines and what are the limits

> Vector will read each of the pipeline configuration files at start time and create an `id` attribute corresponding to the pipeline's filename. A `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as `id`. In the pipeline's configuration file, the `id` can be set manually.

Reviewer 6: > at start time

With regard to vector's boot, today we support live reloads of configuration. I've got appetite to drop this feature entirely but it's not something we've talked about broadly in the team, so please do consider whether pipelines are a reload capable feature or if we should fast-track the conversation around dropping live reload.

Author: I noticed this live reload feature yesterday and didn't think about changing this. 👍

In addition, a `version` attribute will be set containing the hash of the pipeline's configuration file to keep track of the file changes.
In case several files having the same `id` in that folder (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`), vector should error.

Those pipeline's configuration files should only contain transforms or vector will error.
Each of the defined transforms will be callable by using `pipeline-id.transform-id` outside of the pipeline's configuration file to avoid conflicts.
A pipeline cannot use a component defined in another pipeline of vector will error.

> The structure of the pipeline's configuration file should be as follow

Reviewer 6: 'as follows'

```toml

> id = "load-balancer"

Reviewer 7: If we require this then the file structure becomes required and and we remove the ability to have multiple pipelines in a single file. Would a more flexible approach be requiring that each component is namespaced to a specific pipeline like:

```
pipelines.load_balancer.transforms.first
...
```

[transforms.first]
...

[transforms.second]
...
```

Now, if we look deeper at the configuration building process, the configuration compiler will require the pipelines in order to build the [configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/builder.rs#L71).

> To do so, we'll need to implement a `PipelineBuilder` that would work the same way as the the `ConfigBuilder` and use it in [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4) in order to load the pipeline's components inside the configuration. When building the `Config`, the [transforms](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L34) from the pipelines will have to be injected only when they are being used.

Reviewer 2: This could benefit from psuedo code. It also feels misplaced in this section. I would split it out into a section focused on implementation.

> ### What metadatas vector adds to the events going through a pipeline

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### What metadata vector adds to the events going through a pipeline
```

> ### What metadatas vector adds to the events going through a pipeline

Reviewer 2: This title feels poorly worded. It's focused on implementation without giving context to the problem (why?). This limits discussion. I would reword the title to something like "Observing pipelines", add a couple of sentences describing the intent, and then propose an opinionated solution.

Each time an event goes through a pipeline, vector will create a field (a tag for metrics) `pipelines.${PIPELINE_ID} = ${PIPELINE_VERSION}` in order to be able to track the path taken by an event.

> To do so, here are 2 options.

Reviewer 6: I don't care for either of these options. The first 'By dynamically creating a transform each time a pipeline is used' will bottle-neck in remap and the per-event approach taken here retards efforts to move events around in blocks internal to vector, a key performance goal. The second 'By adding the field each time an event goes through a pipeline' makes the transform busier and more solidly per-event, a problem, and adds dynamic work per-event, another problem. 

There's a question I have here that underlay these two concerns: do pipelines ever cross over? That is, do we intend for pipeline 'foo' to ever source or sink into a pipeline 'bar' or will a pipeline 'foo' ever split into separate pipelines 'baz' and 'bing'? It looks like as if we are designing here for merge and split operations but I'm not sure that's actually a requirement. And, if we do design that in I think we're opting into issues around machine locality that we do need to solve for straight out. 

To that last concern, consider being an infra lead at some org in growth stage. You've shipped vector, you have a bunch of pipelines, call them 'alpha', 'beta', 'gamma', 'gamma+alpha'. and they all comfortably fit on one machine. 'gamma+alpha' here means the 'alpha' and 'gamma' pipelines are merged at some point. Now I, the infra lead, know that 'alpha' is going to scale up dramatically so I move it to a new vector deployment. What do I do with 'gamma+alpha'? How does vector deal with that, in this pipeline setup?

Reviewer 6: Unless it's a hard requirement, I'd argue that pipelines should be fully separate in their transform stages. This implies duplicating the source stream into the top of each pipeline and muxing into sinks but these are things we already more or less do. We inject any pipeline tags/labels/whatever at the top of the pipe, which can be done in bulk as needed. Pipeline management from the user perspective then becomes juggling your pipelines to whatever appropriately sized machine without reference to what it may be co-local to.

Reviewer 6: Put another way, if I'm a big enough org that the opening statement of this RFC holds true then I don't have the capability to decide / know which pipelines are co-local to one another and could be split up. Operationally fully separate pipelines are ideal: it opens up the possibility of vector-per-machine-per-pipeline migrations and avoids my vector install slowly becoming a rat king.

Reviewer 2: > That is, do we intend for pipeline 'foo' to ever source or sink into a pipeline 'bar' or will a pipeline 'foo' ever split into separate pipelines 'baz' and 'bing'?

Not at this time. We do plan on allowing the sharing of boilerplate, but I am very concerned about creating a web of pipeline dependencies for management purposes. Constraints are our friend right now and I'd prefer to over constrain to start while we learn.

> To do so, here are 2 options.

Reviewer 2: We typically try to avoid ambiguity like this in our RFCS. It's ok for discussion, but the end state of the RFC should clearly outline a single direction that paves the way for productive work.

source = '''
if is_object(.pipelines) {
  .pipelines = merge(.pipelines, {"load-balancer":"version"})
} else {
  .pipelines = {"load-balancer":"version"}
}
'''

[sink.output]
input = ["pre-output"]
...
...
```

To avoid name conflicts with that dynamic transform, this generated transform name could be made by doing a hash of `pre-${NAME}(${INPUTS})`.

#### By adding the field each time an event goes through a pipeline

Adding the ability to a transform to be aware of its name and if it's part of a pipeline by updating `FunctionTransform` and `TaskTransform`:

```rust
pub trait FunctionTransform: ... {
  // returning the name and the version
  fn pipeline(&self) -> Option<(String, String)>;
  // name of the transform
  fn name(&self) -> String;
}
```

And then adding a `pre_transform` function that would add the pipeline fields

```rust
pub trait FunctionTransform: ... {
  fn transform(&mut self, output: &mut Vec<Event>, event: Event) {
    self.do_transform(output, self.pre_transform);
  }

  fn pre_transform(&mut self, event: Event) -> Event {
    // update the event in order to add the field
  }

  fn transform(&mut self, output: &mut Vec<Event>, event: Event);
}
```

> This solution would required the core of vector and how it handles transforms but would avoid generatic dynamic transforms.

Reviewer 6: 'generatic' do you mean 'generic'?

> It would probably also reduce the performance considering that each transform would have to check if it's part of a pipeline.

Reviewer 6: If an approach has performance implications, either positive or negative, I want to validate those before we sink time into the work.

input = ["nginx_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the nginx logs
'''

[transforms.apache_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter apache logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.apache]
input = ["apache_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the apache logs
'''

[sinks.ouput]
inputs = ["apache", "nginx"]
type = "console"
...
```

can be split into the following `pipelines/frontend.toml`

```toml
[transforms.nginx_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter nginx logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.nginx]
input = ["nginx_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the nginx logs
'''

[transforms.apache_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter apache logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.apache]
input = ["apache_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the apache logs
'''
```

and `vector.toml`

```toml
[sources.docker]
type = "docker_logs"
...

[sinks.ouput]
inputs = ["frontend.apache", "frontend.nginx"]
type = "console"
...
```

> ## Rationale

Reviewer 2: I would use a list syntax for this section.

> This improves the readability of the `vector.toml` and add the possibility to share pipelines or deploy them with some tools like Terraform or Ansible without modifying the main configuration.

Reviewer 2: I agree with the readability, but Terraform and Ansible are usable today. I don't think this change enables those tools unless I am missing something.

> In the future, this will allow us to replicate datadog's pipelines locally.

Reviewer 2: In what way?

## Drawbacks

> - Not yet able to use a pipeline in another pipeline, but this may come in further work.

Reviewer 2: This isn't really a drawback, it's an intention restriction. A drawback is more like:

- It's more to maintain (explain)
- It could be more confusing to certain types of users (explain)
- It could make debugging Vector performance problems more challenging (explain)
- etc.

- First option: creating some hidden transforms and modifying the existing ones could introduce some bugs.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: An RFC with a low number of alternatives concerns me. It's fine to have a position you're arguing for -- that's expected -- but with so little else considered it doesn't strike me that we've thought through the approach stumped for here in detail compared to other approaches. Why not, for instance:

* do nothing (are users asking for this capability directly?)
* evolve vector to use a tag/filter model like our competitors, have a 'pipeline' be a 'tag'
* run a single vector per-'pipeline' and support metric tagging to distinguish at the telemetry level 

Etc etc. I'm not stumping for any of these but I'd like to see more consideration of different ways of approaching this before I have confidence that the one being proposed in this RFC is the best, cleanest way forward.

Reviewer 2: Agree! This is partly my fault since the brief was opinionated on this approach. @zsherman and I have decided to adjust the product briefs to better consider alternatives. That said, I would not mind walking through some of these alternatives to see where we land.

Author: To be honest, I don't think I've a deep enough understanding of Vector (and from our competitors) to tell what would be the pros/cons of those alternatives 🤔

> - Updating the `Topology` to create those transforms at the topology building time in order to avoid modifying the inputs when building the configuration.

Reviewer 6: I don't understand what this is saying.

## Outstanding Questions

- Should we have some visibility attributes on the components in different pipelines in order to make them available to other components?
- Should we have a main (or default) transform in a pipeline that would allow to use the pipeline's ID as a transform name?

## Plan Of Attack

> 1. Update the CLI to take the pipeline directory parameter

Reviewer 6: I'd argue for exposing this configuration parameter last, or at least gate it behind a default-off feature flag so we don't confuse users.

Reviewer 2: Is the purpose of making this configurable to get around OS user-level permissions?

Reviewer 6: Oh no, I just want to avoid exposing something that isn't available / ready yet.

# RFC 8216 - 2021-07-19 - Multiple Pipelines

Large Vector users often require complex Vector topologies to facilitate the collection and processing of data from many different upstream sources. This results in large Vector configuration files that are hard to manage across different teams. This makes Vector a bad candidate for large teams that require autonomy to facilitate sane collaboration.

## Context

- [RFC 2064](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/rfcs/2020-03-17-2064-event-driven-observability.md) Event drive observability.

## Scope

> ### In the scope

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### In scope
```

> - How and where the pipelines are defined
> - How vector reads the pipelines and what are the limitations of pipelines
> - How do we monitor pipelines components

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- How and where pipelines are defined.
- How Vector reads pipelines and what the limitations of pipelines are.
- How we monitor pipelines components.
```

### Out of scope

> - How the pipelines should be synchronized between vector instances

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- How pipelines should be synchronized between Vector instances.
```

## User Experience

- These changes are providing a way for vector users to split their configuration in a way that improves the collaboration between ops and devs.
- This split will be made by allowing the creation of individual pipeline configuration files, intended to align with services and teams, enabling autonomous management.
- The ops will now configure their `sources`, `sinks` and `transforms`, and expose them to be used by the devs.
- The devs will have the ability to consume the provided components without being able to change the common configuration.
- The users will be able to monitor their pipelines through the `internal_metrics` source.

## Motivation

- Helps Vector to grow organically within an organization by allowing teams to adopt Vector at their own pace without heavy administrator involvement.
- Reduces the management overhead of devops/SREs by enabling teams to manage their own pipelines (spread the management load).

## Implementation

> ### How and where the pipelines are stored

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### How and where pipelines are stored
```

To avoid backward incompatibility, pipelines will be loaded from a `pipelines` sub-directory relative to the Vector configuration directory (e.g., `/etc/vector/pipelines`). Therefore, if a user changes the location of the Vector configuration directory they will also change the `pipelines` directory path. They are coupled.

The `pipelines` directory will contain all pipelines represented as individual files. For simplicity, and to ensure users do not overcomplicate pipeline management, sub-directories/nesting are not allowed. This is inspired by Terraform's single-level directory nesting, which has been a net positive for simple management of large Terraform projects.

Each pipeline file is a processing subset of a larger Vector configuration file. Therefore, it follows the same syntax as Vector's configuration (`toml`, `yaml`, and `json`).

### What is a pipeline

- A pipeline is a collection of transforms that only have access to the component declared in the root configuration and their own pipeline's transforms.

> - A pipeline has an `id` being the name of the file without the extension. The pipeline `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as `id`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A pipeline has an `id` being the name of the file without the extension. The pipeline `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as its `id`.
```

- Pipelines have access to any components from the root configuration. If the transform `foo` is defined in `/etc/vector/bar.toml`, it will be accessible by the pipeline `/etc/vector/pipelines/pipeline.toml`.
- If no pipeline is defined, Vector behaves as if the feature didn't exist. This way, a configuration from a version without the `pipeline` feature will keep working.

> - If a pipeline file is left empty, Vector behaves like if it didn't exist.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If a pipeline file is left empty, Vector behaves as if it doesn't exist.
```

If any of the following constraints are not valid, Vector will error on boot. If this occurs during a reload, an error will be triggered and handled in the same fashion as other reload errors.

- There cannot be several pipelines with the same id (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`).
- The pipeline's configuration files should only contain transforms.
- A pipeline's transform cannot have the same name as any component from the root configuration.
- A pipeline cannot use another pipeline's component.

### Representation

> Like said in the previous section, a pipeline is _just_ a set of transforms.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the previous section, a pipeline is _just_ a set of transforms.
```

To be able to forward the events going through the pipeline to a `sink`, we need add a new concept of `route`.

> Those `route` components are only used to build the topology and only represent an interface between the topology and the external sinks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`route` components are used solely to build the topology and represent an interface between the topology and the external sinks.
```

A pipeline will have the following internal representation before building the topology.

```rust
struct Route {
  inputs: Vec<String>,
  outputs: Vec<String>,
}
struct PipelineConfigBuilder {
  id: String,
  transforms: Map<String, TransformOuter>,
  routes: Map<String, Route>,
}
```

Which will create the following configuration file.

```toml
# /etc/vector/pipelines/pipeline.toml
[transforms.foo]
type = "remap"
inputs = ["from-root"]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

[transforms.bar]
type = "remap"
inputs = ["foo"]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

[routes.hot-storage]
inputs = ["foo"]
outputs = ["dc1", "dc2"]

[routes.cold-storage]
inputs = ["bar"]
outputs = ["dc-us", "dc-eu"]
```

The `Route` structure is made to forward the events from inside the pipeline to an external component.

### From configuration to topology

If we look deeper at the configuration building process, the configuration compiler will require the pipelines to build the [configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/builder.rs#L71).

> To do so, we'll need to implement a `PipelineConfigBuilder` from the previous section, then we'll update [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4), to build a `Config` containing the required pipeline components. The compiler will load the pipeline's transforms and add the routes `ouputs` to the corresponding `sinks`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To do so, we'll need to implement a `PipelineConfigBuilder` from the previous section. We'll then update [the `compile` function](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/config/compiler.rs#L4) to build a `Config` containing the required pipeline components. The compiler will load the pipeline's transforms and add the route `outputs` to the corresponding `sinks`.
```

> The components coming from the pipeline will be cloned inside the final `Config`, in the `transforms` `IndexMap` and the `Routes` from the pipeline components will be added to the referring components input field.

Reviewer 4: Can't tell if this is just missing a comma between `transforms` and `IndexMap` or if the latter three code highlights are unrelated. Either way, I'm having a hard time parsing it.

Author: > In the `IndexMap` containing the `tranforms`

For example, the following configuration and pipeline, and its **equivalent** once built.

```toml
# /etc/vector/vector.toml
[sources.in]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

[sinks.out]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

# /etc/vector/pipelines/foo.toml
[transforms.bar]
inputs = ["in"]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

[routes.baz]
inputs = ["bar"]
outputs = ["out"]

# equivalent once compiled
[sources.in]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

> [transforms.foo#baz]

Reviewer 4: I presume the use of a `#` separator was intentional to avoid this being legal TOML?

Does introducing the separator internally for `id`s require any code changes -- such as the API via `top` / `tap`, which may surface these internal representations?

Author: > I presume the use of a # separator was intentional to avoid this being legal TOML?

No, but that's a good point.

> Does introducing the separator internally for ids require any code changes -- such as the API via top / tap, which may surface these internal representations?

Considering that we might have the same transform name in 2 different pipelines, is it a bad this that they appear like this? Unless you've something in mind, I would leave it like this.

Reviewer 4: > Considering that we might have the same transform name in 2 different pipelines, is it a bad this that they appear like this? Unless you've something in mind, I would leave it like this.

To be honest, it's likely we'll run into this issue anyway as we start repurposing or assembling components internally to cater for these kinds of eatures.

We can kick that can down the road for now. Eventually, it might be useful to associate a "friendly" name with a component so that we don't confuse users by exposing an internal representation that was built ad-hoc based on opaque configuration options.

That's certainly not an issue exclusive to this feature, and is likely to keep coming up.

inputs = ["in"]

[sinks.out]
inputs = ["foo#baz"]

> ...

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# ...
```

```

In order to avoid internal conflicts with the pipeline components `id`s, the components `id`s will be internally prefixed with the pipeline `id` (`pipeline_id#component_id`) but the user can still reference the components with their `id` inside the pipeline configuration.
That way, if a transform `foo` is defined in the pipeline `bar` and in the pipeline `baz`, they will not conflict.

### Observing pipelines

Users should be able to observe and monitor individual pipelines.
This means relevant metrics coming from the `internal_metrics` source must contain a `pipeline_id` tag referring to the pipeline's `id`.
This approach would extend the [RFC 2064](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/rfcs/2020-03-17-2064-event-driven-observability.md#collecting-uniform-context-data) by _just_ adding `pipeline_id` to the context.

> In Vector, once [the topology is built from the configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/topology/builder.rs#L106), every component is encapsulated in a `Task`, that intercept any incoming event and does why it has to do. This task also keeps track of its internal metrics and finally emits those `internal_metrics` events.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Vector, once [the topology is built from the configuration](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/topology/builder.rs#L106), every component is encapsulated in a `Task` that intercepts an incoming event and processes it accordingly. This task also keeps track of its internal metrics and finally emits `internal_metrics` events.
```

```rust
pub struct Task {
    #[pin]
    inner: BoxFuture<'static, Result<TaskOutput, ()>>,
    name: String,
    typetag: String,
    pipeline: Option<String>,
}
impl Task {
    pub fn new<S1, S2, Fut>(name: S1, typetag: S2, pipeline: Option<String>, inner: Fut) -> Self
    where
        S1: Into<String>,
        S2: Into<String>,
        Fut: Future<Output = Result<TaskOutput, ()>> + Send + 'static,
    {
        Self {
            inner: inner.boxed(),
            name: name.into(),
            typetag: typetag.into(),
            pipeline,
        }
    }
}
````

That way, when vector [spawns a new transform task](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/v0.15.0/src/topology/mod.rs#L574), it will be able to add the optional pipeline information to the span.

```rust
let span = error_span!(
    "transform",
    component_kind = "transform",
    component_name = %task.name(),
    component_type = %task.typetag(),
    pipeline_id = %task.pipeline_id(),
);
```

Doing so, each time the task will emit an internal event, it will be populated by the optional `pipeline_id`.

## Rationale

- Why is this change worth it?

> This split improves the readability of the configuration files and allows the users to collaborate, which makes using Vector more user-friendly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This split improves the readability of the configuration files and allows users to collaborate (including across teams), which makes using Vector more user and team friendly.
```

IMO, the biggest benefit is the separation of concerns. Added a suggestion here to emphasize team friendliness.

- What is the impact of not doing this?

> This would force the users to keep having complex configuration files and/or to duplicate components configuration between their configuration files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This would force users to maintain complex configuration files and/or to duplicate component configuration across configuration files.
```

- How does this position us for success in the future?

With this representation, we'll be able add access control by, for example, declaring the pipelines inside the configuration files to limit the reachable components. We would also be able to specify a quota for each pipeline.

## Prior Art

_TODO_

## Drawbacks

- Why should we not do this?
- What kind of ongoing burden does this place on the team?

## Alternatives

> - Do nothing: we can already use several configuration files, people could split their existing configuration.
> 
> This would imply some duplication if a transform is used in multiple configuration files.
> Anybody could add a sink or source even if they don't have permission.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Do nothing: we can already use several configuration files, people could split their existing configuration. This would imply some duplication if a transform is used in multiple configuration files.
Anybody could add a sink or source even if they don't have permission.
```

Hoisted this second paragraph, to fit within the same bullet point.

It might be worth adding a qualifier to: _"Anybody could add a sink or source even if they don't have permission"_. IMO, this implies Vector is publicly accessible. I take it what you mean here is more that there would be _one_ permission level to whomever has access to the filesystem Vector is reading from vs. being able to separate concerns between a "root" config and a "pipeline".

Author: > This would imply some duplication if a transform is used in multiple configuration files.

I guess this is part of the answer but I agree with the rest.

- Do nothing: write a tool that would write a big configuration file where each pipeline would start with a dummy filter that we could monitor in the `internal_metrics`.

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

Nit: Seemed like two carriage returns too many!

> - Evolve vector to use a tag/filter model like our competitors, have a 'pipeline' be a 'tag'.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Evolve vector to use a tag/filter model like our competitors; have a 'pipeline' be a 'tag'.
```

> Not able to add internal metrics to specific transforms and monitor them.

Reviewer 4: Can't tell whether this is a standalone bullet, or part of the previous?

Author: It's a standalone one, but the 3 first are kind of related and have similar answers.

# RFC 8216 - 2021-07-19 - Multiple Pipelines

Large Vector users often require complex Vector topologies to facilitate the collection and processing of data from many different upstream sources. This results in large Vector configuration files that are hard to manage across different teams. This makes Vector a bad candidate for large teams that require autonomy to facilitate sane collaboration.

## Context

- [RFC 2064](https://github.com/timberio/vector/blob/master/rfcs/2020-03-17-2064-event-driven-observability.md) Event drive observability.

## Scope

### In scope

- How and where pipelines are defined.

> - How Vector reads pipelines and what the limitations of pipelines are.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- How Vector loads pipelines
- Fundamental limitations of pipelines.
```

> - How we monitor pipelines components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- How pipelines are monitored.
```

- Reduces the management overhead of devops/SREs by enabling teams to manage their own pipelines (spread the management load).

## Implementation

### How and where pipelines are stored

To avoid backward incompatibility, pipelines will be loaded from a `pipelines` sub-directory relative to the Vector configuration directory (e.g., `/etc/vector/pipelines`). Therefore, if a user changes the location of the Vector configuration directory they will also change the `pipelines` directory path. They are coupled.

The `pipelines` directory will contain all pipelines represented as individual files. For simplicity, and to ensure users do not overcomplicate pipeline management, sub-directories/nesting are not allowed. This is inspired by Terraform's single-level directory nesting, which has been a net positive for simple management of large Terraform projects.

Each pipeline file is a processing subset of a larger Vector configuration file. Therefore, it follows the same syntax as Vector's configuration (`toml`, `yaml`, and `json`).

### What is a pipeline

> - A pipeline is a collection of transforms that only have access to the component declared in the root configuration and their own pipeline's transforms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A pipeline is a collection of transforms that only have access to the components declared in the root configuration and their own pipeline's transforms.
```

> - A pipeline is a collection of transforms that only have access to the component declared in the root configuration and their own pipeline's transforms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A pipeline is a collection of transforms, sources and sinks cannot be defined within pipelines.
```

Point 3 covers this restriction.

- A pipeline has an `id` being the name of the file without the extension. The pipeline `load-balancer.yml` will have `load-balancer` as its `id`.

> - Pipelines have access to any components from the root configuration. If the transform `foo` is defined in `/etc/vector/bar.toml`, it will be accessible by the pipeline `/etc/vector/pipelines/pipeline.toml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Pipelines have access to any components defined in the root configuration directory. For example, if the transform `foo` is defined in `/etc/vector/bar.toml`, it will be accessible by the pipeline `/etc/vector/pipelines/pipeline.toml`, but if a transform `bar` is defined in `/etc/vector/pipelines/another-pipeline.toml`, it will _not_ be accessible by other pipelines.
```

- If no pipeline is defined, Vector behaves as if the feature didn't exist. This way, a configuration from a version without the `pipeline` feature will keep working.
- If a pipeline file is left empty, Vector behaves as if it doesn't exist.

> If any of the following constraints are not valid, Vector will error on boot. If this occurs during a reload, an error will be triggered and handled in the same fashion as other reload errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pipeline constraints

If any of the following constraints are not valid, Vector will error on boot. If this occurs during a reload, an error will be triggered and handled in the same fashion as other reload errors.
```

- There cannot be several pipelines with the same id (for example `load-balancer.yml` and `load-balancer.json`).
- The pipeline's configuration files should only contain transforms.
- A pipeline's transform cannot have the same name as any component from the root configuration.
- A pipeline cannot use another pipeline's component.

> ### Representation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Internal representation
```

The components coming from the pipeline will be cloned inside the final `Config`, in the `IndexMap` containing the `transforms` and the `outputs` from the pipeline components will be added to the referring components input field.

For example, the following configuration and pipeline, and its **equivalent** once built.

```toml
# /etc/vector/vector.toml
[sources.in]
# ...

[sinks.out]
# ...

# /etc/vector/pipelines/foo.toml
[transforms.bar]
inputs = ["in"]
outputs = ["out"]
# ...

# equivalent once compiled
[sources.in]
# ...

[transforms.foo#baz]
inputs = ["in"]

[sinks.out]
# the # notation is just a representation of the pipeline namespace
inputs = ["foo#baz"]
# ...
```

In order to avoid internal conflicts with the pipeline components `id`s, the components `id`s internal representation will be changed to the following `enum`

```rust
enum ComponentId {
  Global { name: String },
  Pipeline { pipeline_id: String, name: String },

> }

Author: LGTM, I update that and it's good to go 😉

input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter nginx logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.nginx]
input = ["nginx_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the nginx logs
'''

[transforms.apache_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter apache logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.apache]
input = ["apache_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the apache logs
'''

[sinks.ouput]
inputs = ["apache", "nginx"]
type = "console"
...
```

can be split into the following `pipelines/frontend.toml`

```toml
[transforms.nginx_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter nginx logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.nginx]
input = ["frontend.nginx_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the nginx logs
'''

[transforms.apache_filter]
input = ["docker"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do something that filter apache logs from docker logs
'''

[transforms.apache]
input = ["frontend.apache_filter"]
type = "remap"
source = '''
  # do some transformations with the apache logs
'''
```

> and `vector.toml`

Reviewer 2: I'd like to see pipeline resource allocation here. Basically, settings that determine how global resources are made available to pipelines. Right now this is just sinks/sources, but it will also include new concepts like resources (being introduced in the [CSV enrichment RFC](https://github.com/timberio/vector/pull/8400)). To be specific:

- Defaults. Should new pipelines have access to all sources and sinks, specific ones, or none? How can admin change this?
- Individual pipeline allocations. Overriding defaults for each pipeline.

```toml
[sources.docker]
type = "docker_logs"
...

[sinks.ouput]
inputs = ["frontend.apache", "frontend.nginx"]
type = "console"
...
```

## Rationale

- This improves the readability of the `vector.toml`.

## Drawbacks

_TODO_

## Alternatives

- Do nothing: we can already use several configuration files, people could split their existing configuration.

This would imply some duplication if a transform is used in multiple configuration files.

- Evolve vector to use a tag/filter model like our competitors, have a 'pipeline' be a 'tag'.

- Run a single vector per-'pipeline' and support metric tagging to distinguish at the telemetry level.

## Outstanding Questions

> - Should the `pipelines` directory location be configurable through the cli?

Reviewer 2: I would make these sub-headings with discussion below. That helps with reading and commenting. See: https://github.com/timberio/vector/tree/master/rfcs#use-good-technical-grammar

Reviewer 2: In addition, we need a lot more explanation and examples for some of these, I don't think others will understand them otherwise.
